docs/api-reference/collection.mdx, before:

---
title: Collection
description: "Python API reference for the Collection class."
---

## `vxdb.Collection`

A collection of vectors with a fixed dimension. Supports upsert, query, hybrid search, keyword search, and delete operations.

```python
import vxdb

db = vxdb.Database()
collection = db.create_collection("docs", dimension=384)
```

---

## Methods

### `upsert`

Insert or update vectors. If an ID already exists, it is replaced.

```python
collection.upsert(
    ids=["a", "b", "c"],
    vectors=[[0.1, 0.2, ...], [0.3, 0.4, ...], [0.5, 0.6, ...]],
    metadata=[{"type": "article"}, {"type": "blog"}, {"type": "article"}],
    documents=["intro to ML", "favorite recipes", "deep learning guide"],
)
```

**Parameters:**

| Parameter | Type | Required | Description |
|---|---|---|---|
| `ids` | `list[str]` | Yes | Unique identifiers |
| `vectors` | `list[list[float]]` | Yes | Embedding vectors (must match collection dimension) |
| `metadata` | `list[dict]` | No | Key-value metadata for filtering |
| `documents` | `list[str]` | No | Raw text for hybrid/keyword search |

<Note>
Pass `documents=` to enable `hybrid_query()` and `keyword_search()`.
</Note>

---

### `query`

Vector similarity search. Returns the closest vectors to the query, ranked by score.

```python
results = collection.query(
    vector=[0.1, 0.2, ...],
    top_k=5,
    filter={"type": {"$eq": "article"}},
)
```

**Parameters:**

| Parameter | Type | Required | Default | Description |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `vector` | `list[float]` | Yes | — | Query vector |
| `top_k` | `int` | No | `10` | Number of results |
| `filter` | `dict` | No | `None` | Metadata filter (see [operators](/core-concepts/metadata-filtering)) |

**Returns:** `list[dict]` — each dict has `id`, `score`, and `metadata`.

```python
[
    {"id": "a", "score": 0.9832, "metadata": {"type": "article"}},
    {"id": "c", "score": 0.9614, "metadata": {"type": "article"}},
]
```

---

### `hybrid_query`

Combined vector + keyword search using Reciprocal Rank Fusion.

```python
results = collection.hybrid_query(
    vector=[0.1, 0.2, ...],
    query="machine learning",
    top_k=5,
    alpha=0.5,
)
```

**Parameters:**

| Parameter | Type | Required | Default | Description |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `vector` | `list[float]` | Yes | — | Query vector |
| `query` | `str` | Yes | — | Keyword query for BM25 |
| `top_k` | `int` | No | `10` | Number of results |
| `alpha` | `float` | No | `0.5` | Blend: `1.0` = vector only, `0.0` = keyword only |

**Returns:** `list[dict]` — same format as `query()`.

---

### `keyword_search`

Pure BM25 keyword search. No vector needed.

```python
results = collection.keyword_search(query="machine learning", top_k=5)
```

**Parameters:**

| Parameter | Type | Required | Default | Description |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `query` | `str` | Yes | — | Search terms |
| `top_k` | `int` | No | `10` | Number of results |

**Returns:** `list[dict]`

---

### `delete`

Delete vectors by ID.

```python
deleted = collection.delete(ids=["a", "b"])
# [True, True]
```

**Parameters:**

| Parameter | Type | Required | Description |
|---|---|---|---|
| `ids` | `list[str]` | Yes | IDs to delete |

**Returns:** `list[bool]` — `True` for each ID that was found and deleted.

---

### `count`

Return the number of vectors in the collection.

```python
n = collection.count()
# 42
```

**Returns:** `int`

Commit message:

Add persistent storage: mmap vectors + SQLite metadata + WAL crash recovery
Introduce durable persistence for vxdb so data survives process restarts
and crashes. Users opt in by passing a path to the Database constructor
(`Database(path="./data")`); omitting the path preserves the existing
in-memory behavior.

Storage engine (new file: persistent.rs):
- PersistentStorage combining mmap vector storage (vectors.vex) with
  SQLite WAL-journaled metadata (store.db) per collection
- Supports save_entry, save_batch, delete_entry, and load_all
- Batch writes wrapped in SQLite transactions

Collection persistence (collection.rs):
- Collection::create_persistent() and Collection::open() for on-disk
  lifecycle; config.json written per collection
- All mutation methods write-through to PersistentStorage when present
- Database::open() loads collections from disk, replays the WAL for
  crash recovery, then checkpoints
- create/delete_collection log to WAL and manage disk directories

WAL (wal.rs):
- Add optional document field to WalEntry::Upsert for BM25 coverage

Python bindings (vxdb-python):
- Database(path=None) -> in-memory; Database(path="./data") -> persistent

Docs & README:
- New persistence.mdx core-concepts page (layout, write path, recovery)
- All docs/examples updated to show persistent mode as default
- Zvec (Alibaba) added to comparison table with dedicated trade-off section
- Roadmap updated: persistence done; quantization, HNSW serialization planned

Housekeeping:
- .gitignore: add *.vex, *.wal, store.db patterns
- Remove tracked __pycache__ and .so build artifacts

docs/api-reference/collection.mdx, after:

---
title: Collection
description: "Python API reference for the Collection class."
---

## `vxdb.Collection`

A collection of vectors with a fixed dimension. Supports upsert, query, hybrid search, keyword search, and delete operations.

```python
import vxdb

db = vxdb.Database(path="./my_data")  # or vxdb.Database() for in-memory
collection = db.create_collection("docs", dimension=384)
```

---

## Methods

### `upsert`

Insert or update vectors. If an ID already exists, it is replaced.

```python
collection.upsert(
    ids=["a", "b", "c"],
    vectors=[[0.1, 0.2, ...], [0.3, 0.4, ...], [0.5, 0.6, ...]],
    metadata=[{"type": "article"}, {"type": "blog"}, {"type": "article"}],
    documents=["intro to ML", "favorite recipes", "deep learning guide"],
)
```

**Parameters:**

| Parameter | Type | Required | Description |
|---|---|---|---|
| `ids` | `list[str]` | Yes | Unique identifiers |
| `vectors` | `list[list[float]]` | Yes | Embedding vectors (must match collection dimension) |
| `metadata` | `list[dict]` | No | Key-value metadata for filtering |
| `documents` | `list[str]` | No | Raw text for hybrid/keyword search |

<Note>
Pass `documents=` to enable `hybrid_query()` and `keyword_search()`.
</Note>

---

### `query`

Vector similarity search. Returns the closest vectors to the query, ranked by score.

```python
results = collection.query(
    vector=[0.1, 0.2, ...],
    top_k=5,
    filter={"type": {"$eq": "article"}},
)
```

**Parameters:**

| Parameter | Type | Required | Default | Description |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `vector` | `list[float]` | Yes | — | Query vector |
| `top_k` | `int` | No | `10` | Number of results |
| `filter` | `dict` | No | `None` | Metadata filter (see [operators](/core-concepts/metadata-filtering)) |

**Returns:** `list[dict]` — each dict has `id`, `score`, and `metadata`.

```python
[
    {"id": "a", "score": 0.9832, "metadata": {"type": "article"}},
    {"id": "c", "score": 0.9614, "metadata": {"type": "article"}},
]
```

---

### `hybrid_query`

Combined vector + keyword search using Reciprocal Rank Fusion.

```python
results = collection.hybrid_query(
    vector=[0.1, 0.2, ...],
    query="machine learning",
    top_k=5,
    alpha=0.5,
)
```

**Parameters:**

| Parameter | Type | Required | Default | Description |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `vector` | `list[float]` | Yes | — | Query vector |
| `query` | `str` | Yes | — | Keyword query for BM25 |
| `top_k` | `int` | No | `10` | Number of results |
| `alpha` | `float` | No | `0.5` | Blend: `1.0` = vector only, `0.0` = keyword only |

**Returns:** `list[dict]` — same format as `query()`.

---

### `keyword_search`

Pure BM25 keyword search. No vector needed.

```python
results = collection.keyword_search(query="machine learning", top_k=5)
```

**Parameters:**

| Parameter | Type | Required | Default | Description |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `query` | `str` | Yes | — | Search terms |
| `top_k` | `int` | No | `10` | Number of results |

**Returns:** `list[dict]`

---

### `delete`

Delete vectors by ID.

```python
deleted = collection.delete(ids=["a", "b"])
# [True, True]
```

**Parameters:**

| Parameter | Type | Required | Description |
|---|---|---|---|
| `ids` | `list[str]` | Yes | IDs to delete |

**Returns:** `list[bool]` — `True` for each ID that was found and deleted.

---

### `count`

Return the number of vectors in the collection.

```python
n = collection.count()
# 42
```

**Returns:** `int`
