docs/api-reference/database.mdx, before:

---
title: Database
description: "Python API reference for the Database class."
---

## `vxdb.Database`

The entry point for embedded mode. Holds and manages multiple collections.

```python
import vxdb

db = vxdb.Database()
```

---

## Methods

### `create_collection`

Create a new collection.

```python
collection = db.create_collection(
    name="docs",
    dimension=384,
    metric="cosine",
    index="flat",
)
```

**Parameters:**

| Parameter | Type | Required | Default | Description |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `name` | `str` | Yes | — | Unique collection name |
| `dimension` | `int` | Yes | — | Number of floats per vector |
| `metric` | `str` | No | `"cosine"` | Distance metric: `"cosine"`, `"euclidean"`, `"dot"` |
| `index` | `str` | No | `"flat"` | Index type: `"flat"` (exact), `"hnsw"` (approximate) |

**Returns:** `Collection`

**Raises:** Error if a collection with that name already exists.

---

### `get_collection`

Get an existing collection by name.

```python
collection = db.get_collection("docs")
```

**Parameters:**

| Parameter | Type | Required | Description |
|---|---|---|---|
| `name` | `str` | Yes | Collection name |

**Returns:** `Collection`

**Raises:** Error if the collection does not exist.

---

### `list_collections`

List all collection names.

```python
names = db.list_collections()
# ["docs", "images"]
```

**Returns:** `list[str]`

---

### `delete_collection`

Delete a collection and all its data.

```python
db.delete_collection("docs")
```

**Parameters:**

| Parameter | Type | Required | Description |
|---|---|---|---|
| `name` | `str` | Yes | Collection name |

**Raises:** Error if the collection does not exist.

Commit message:

Add persistent storage: mmap vectors + SQLite metadata + WAL crash recovery
Introduce durable persistence for vxdb so data survives process restarts
and crashes. Users opt in by passing a path to the Database constructor
(`Database(path="./data")`); omitting the path preserves the existing
in-memory behavior.

Storage engine (new file: persistent.rs):
- PersistentStorage combining mmap vector storage (vectors.vex) with
  SQLite WAL-journaled metadata (store.db) per collection
- Supports save_entry, save_batch, delete_entry, and load_all
- Batch writes wrapped in SQLite transactions

Collection persistence (collection.rs):
- Collection::create_persistent() and Collection::open() for on-disk
  lifecycle; config.json written per collection
- All mutation methods write-through to PersistentStorage when present
- Database::open() loads collections from disk, replays the WAL for
  crash recovery, then checkpoints
- create/delete_collection log to WAL and manage disk directories

WAL (wal.rs):
- Add optional document field to WalEntry::Upsert for BM25 coverage

Python bindings (vxdb-python):
- Database(path=None) -> in-memory; Database(path="./data") -> persistent

Docs & README:
- New persistence.mdx core-concepts page (layout, write path, recovery)
- All docs/examples updated to show persistent mode as default
- Zvec (Alibaba) added to comparison table with dedicated trade-off section
- Roadmap updated: persistence done; quantization, HNSW serialization planned

Housekeeping:
- .gitignore: add *.vex, *.wal, store.db patterns
- Remove tracked __pycache__ and .so build artifacts

docs/api-reference/database.mdx, after:

---
title: Database
description: "Python API reference for the Database class."
---

## `vxdb.Database`

The entry point for embedded mode. Holds and manages multiple collections.

```python
import vxdb

# Persistent — data survives restarts
db = vxdb.Database(path="./my_data")

# In-memory — fast and ephemeral
db = vxdb.Database()
```

**Constructor parameters:**

| Parameter | Type | Required | Default | Description |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `path` | `str` | No | `None` | Directory for persistent storage. If omitted, the database is in-memory only. |

When `path` is provided:
- Collections, vectors, metadata, and documents are persisted to disk automatically on every write.
- Data is stored using **mmap** (vectors), **SQLite** (metadata + documents), and a **write-ahead log** (crash recovery).
- Reopening the same path restores all data.

When `path` is omitted:
- Everything lives in memory. Data is lost when the process exits.
- Ideal for prototyping, tests, and ephemeral workloads.

---

## Methods

### `create_collection`

Create a new collection.

```python
collection = db.create_collection(
    name="docs",
    dimension=384,
    metric="cosine",
    index="flat",
)
```

**Parameters:**

| Parameter | Type | Required | Default | Description |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `name` | `str` | Yes | — | Unique collection name |
| `dimension` | `int` | Yes | — | Number of floats per vector |
| `metric` | `str` | No | `"cosine"` | Distance metric: `"cosine"`, `"euclidean"`, `"dot"` |
| `index` | `str` | No | `"flat"` | Index type: `"flat"` (exact), `"hnsw"` (approximate) |

**Returns:** `Collection`

**Raises:** Error if a collection with that name already exists.

---

### `get_collection`

Get an existing collection by name.

```python
collection = db.get_collection("docs")
```

**Parameters:**

| Parameter | Type | Required | Description |
|---|---|---|---|
| `name` | `str` | Yes | Collection name |

**Returns:** `Collection`

**Raises:** Error if the collection does not exist.

---

### `list_collections`

List all collection names.

```python
names = db.list_collections()
# ["docs", "images"]
```

**Returns:** `list[str]`

---

### `delete_collection`

Delete a collection and all its data.

```python
db.delete_collection("docs")
```

**Parameters:**

| Parameter | Type | Required | Description |
|---|---|---|---|
| `name` | `str` | Yes | Collection name |

**Raises:** Error if the collection does not exist.
