docs/quickstart.mdx, before:

---
title: Quick Start
description: "Every core feature in 5 minutes. No API keys needed."
---

## Create a database and collection

A **Database** holds multiple **Collections**. Each collection stores vectors of a fixed dimension.

```python
import vxdb

db = vxdb.Database()
collection = db.create_collection(
    name="articles",
    dimension=4,        # match your embedding model (384, 768, 1536, etc.)
    metric="cosine",    # cosine | euclidean | dot
    index="flat",       # flat (exact) | hnsw (approximate, faster for >100k vectors)
)
```

## Insert vectors

Use `upsert()` to insert or update vectors. Each entry needs an **id** and a **vector**. Optionally attach **metadata** and **documents** (raw text for hybrid/keyword search).

```python
collection.upsert(
    ids=["doc1", "doc2", "doc3", "doc4", "doc5"],
    vectors=[
        [1.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0],
        [0.0, 1.0, 0.0, 0.0],
        [0.9, 0.1, 0.0, 0.0],
        [0.0, 0.0, 1.0, 0.0],
        [0.5, 0.5, 0.0, 0.0],
    ],
    metadata=[
        {"title": "Intro to ML",    "category": "tech",  "year": 2024},
        {"title": "Cooking Pasta",   "category": "food",  "year": 2023},
        {"title": "Advanced ML",     "category": "tech",  "year": 2024},
        {"title": "Gardening 101",   "category": "lifestyle", "year": 2022},
        {"title": "Data Science",    "category": "tech",  "year": 2023},
    ],
    documents=[
        "Introduction to machine learning and neural networks",
        "How to cook perfect pasta with homemade sauce",
        "Advanced machine learning techniques and optimization",
        "A beginner's guide to gardening and growing vegetables",
        "Data science fundamentals with Python and statistics",
    ],
)
```

## Search — four ways

### Vector similarity

```python
results = collection.query(vector=[1.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0], top_k=3)
```

### Filtered search

Narrow results using [metadata filters](/core-concepts/metadata-filtering):

```python
results = collection.query(
    vector=[1.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0],
    top_k=5,
    filter={
        "$and": [
            {"category": {"$eq": "tech"}},
            {"year": {"$gte": 2024}},
        ]
    },
)
```

### Hybrid search (vector + keyword)

Combines vector similarity with BM25 keyword matching via [Reciprocal Rank Fusion](/core-concepts/hybrid-search):

```python
results = collection.hybrid_query(
    vector=[1.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0],
    query="machine learning",
    top_k=3,
    alpha=0.5,  # 0 = keyword only, 1 = vector only
)
```

<Note>
You must pass `documents=` during `upsert()` to use hybrid or keyword search.
</Note>

### Keyword search (BM25)

```python
results = collection.keyword_search(query="pasta sauce", top_k=3)
```

## Update and delete

Upserting with an existing ID replaces that entry. Delete removes vectors by ID.

```python
collection.upsert(
    ids=["doc1"],
    vectors=[[0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 1.0]],
    metadata=[{"title": "Intro to ML (revised)", "category": "tech", "year": 2025}],
)

collection.delete(ids=["doc4"])
```

## Multiple collections

A single database can hold many collections:

```python
db.create_collection("images", dimension=512, metric="cosine", index="hnsw")
db.create_collection("audio", dimension=256, metric="euclidean")

db.list_collections()   # ["articles", "images", "audio"]
db.delete_collection("audio")
```

## Result format

Every search method returns a list of results:

```python
[
    {"id": "doc1", "score": 0.9832, "metadata": {"title": "Intro to ML", ...}},
    {"id": "doc3", "score": 0.9614, "metadata": {"title": "Advanced ML", ...}},
]
```

## Next steps

<CardGroup cols={2}>
  <Card title="Integrations" icon="plug" href="/integrations/openai">
    Plug in real embedding models from OpenAI, Sentence Transformers, Cohere, or LangChain.
  </Card>
  <Card title="Hybrid Search" icon="magnifying-glass" href="/core-concepts/hybrid-search">
    Deep dive into when and why to use hybrid search.
  </Card>
</CardGroup>

Commit message:

Add persistent storage: mmap vectors + SQLite metadata + WAL crash recovery
Introduce durable persistence for vxdb so data survives process restarts
and crashes. Users opt in by passing a path to the Database constructor
(`Database(path="./data")`); omitting the path preserves the existing
in-memory behavior.

Storage engine (new file: persistent.rs):
- PersistentStorage combining mmap vector storage (vectors.vex) with
  SQLite WAL-journaled metadata (store.db) per collection
- Supports save_entry, save_batch, delete_entry, and load_all
- Batch writes wrapped in SQLite transactions

Collection persistence (collection.rs):
- Collection::create_persistent() and Collection::open() for on-disk
  lifecycle; config.json written per collection
- All mutation methods write-through to PersistentStorage when present
- Database::open() loads collections from disk, replays the WAL for
  crash recovery, then checkpoints
- create/delete_collection log to WAL and manage disk directories

WAL (wal.rs):
- Add optional document field to WalEntry::Upsert for BM25 coverage

Python bindings (vxdb-python):
- Database(path=None) -> in-memory; Database(path="./data") -> persistent

Docs & README:
- New persistence.mdx core-concepts page (layout, write path, recovery)
- All docs/examples updated to show persistent mode as default
- Zvec (Alibaba) added to comparison table with dedicated trade-off section
- Roadmap updated: persistence done; quantization, HNSW serialization planned

Housekeeping:
- .gitignore: add *.vex, *.wal, store.db patterns
- Remove tracked __pycache__ and .so build artifacts

docs/quickstart.mdx, after:

---
title: Quick Start
description: "Every core feature in 5 minutes. No API keys needed."
---

## Create a database and collection

A **Database** holds multiple **Collections**. Each collection stores vectors of a fixed dimension.

```python
import vxdb

# Persistent — data survives restarts (recommended)
db = vxdb.Database(path="./my_data")

# Or in-memory — fast and ephemeral, great for prototyping
# db = vxdb.Database()

collection = db.create_collection(
    name="articles",
    dimension=4,        # match your embedding model (384, 768, 1536, etc.)
    metric="cosine",    # cosine | euclidean | dot
    index="flat",       # flat (exact) | hnsw (approximate, faster for >100k vectors)
)
```

<Tip>
When using `path=`, your collections, vectors, metadata, and documents are all persisted to disk automatically. Reopen the same path later to pick up where you left off.
</Tip>

## Insert vectors

Use `upsert()` to insert or update vectors. Each entry needs an **id** and a **vector**. Optionally attach **metadata** and **documents** (raw text for hybrid/keyword search).

```python
collection.upsert(
    ids=["doc1", "doc2", "doc3", "doc4", "doc5"],
    vectors=[
        [1.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0],
        [0.0, 1.0, 0.0, 0.0],
        [0.9, 0.1, 0.0, 0.0],
        [0.0, 0.0, 1.0, 0.0],
        [0.5, 0.5, 0.0, 0.0],
    ],
    metadata=[
        {"title": "Intro to ML",    "category": "tech",  "year": 2024},
        {"title": "Cooking Pasta",   "category": "food",  "year": 2023},
        {"title": "Advanced ML",     "category": "tech",  "year": 2024},
        {"title": "Gardening 101",   "category": "lifestyle", "year": 2022},
        {"title": "Data Science",    "category": "tech",  "year": 2023},
    ],
    documents=[
        "Introduction to machine learning and neural networks",
        "How to cook perfect pasta with homemade sauce",
        "Advanced machine learning techniques and optimization",
        "A beginner's guide to gardening and growing vegetables",
        "Data science fundamentals with Python and statistics",
    ],
)
```

## Search — four ways

### Vector similarity

```python
results = collection.query(vector=[1.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0], top_k=3)
```

### Filtered search

Narrow results using [metadata filters](/core-concepts/metadata-filtering):

```python
results = collection.query(
    vector=[1.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0],
    top_k=5,
    filter={
        "$and": [
            {"category": {"$eq": "tech"}},
            {"year": {"$gte": 2024}},
        ]
    },
)
```

### Hybrid search (vector + keyword)

Combines vector similarity with BM25 keyword matching via [Reciprocal Rank Fusion](/core-concepts/hybrid-search):

```python
results = collection.hybrid_query(
    vector=[1.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0],
    query="machine learning",
    top_k=3,
    alpha=0.5,  # 0 = keyword only, 1 = vector only
)
```

<Note>
You must pass `documents=` during `upsert()` to use hybrid or keyword search.
</Note>

### Keyword search (BM25)

```python
results = collection.keyword_search(query="pasta sauce", top_k=3)
```

## Update and delete

Upserting with an existing ID replaces that entry. Delete removes vectors by ID.

```python
collection.upsert(
    ids=["doc1"],
    vectors=[[0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 1.0]],
    metadata=[{"title": "Intro to ML (revised)", "category": "tech", "year": 2025}],
)

collection.delete(ids=["doc4"])
```

## Multiple collections

A single database can hold many collections:

```python
db.create_collection("images", dimension=512, metric="cosine", index="hnsw")
db.create_collection("audio", dimension=256, metric="euclidean")

db.list_collections()   # ["articles", "images", "audio"]
db.delete_collection("audio")
```

## Result format

Every search method returns a list of results:

```python
[
    {"id": "doc1", "score": 0.9832, "metadata": {"title": "Intro to ML", ...}},
    {"id": "doc3", "score": 0.9614, "metadata": {"title": "Advanced ML", ...}},
]
```

## Next steps

<CardGroup cols={2}>
  <Card title="Integrations" icon="plug" href="/integrations/openai">
    Plug in real embedding models from OpenAI, Sentence Transformers, Cohere, or LangChain.
  </Card>
  <Card title="Hybrid Search" icon="magnifying-glass" href="/core-concepts/hybrid-search">
    Deep dive into when and why to use hybrid search.
  </Card>
</CardGroup>
