docs/core-concepts/collections.mdx, before:

---
title: Collections
description: "Organize your vectors into collections with configurable dimensions, distance metrics, and index types."
---

## What is a collection?

A **collection** is a named container of vectors. Each collection has a fixed **dimension** (the number of floats per vector) and a configured **distance metric** and **index type**. A single `Database` can hold many collections.

```python
import vxdb

db = vxdb.Database()
collection = db.create_collection(
    name="documents",
    dimension=384,
    metric="cosine",
    index="flat",
)
```

## Parameters

### Dimension

The number of floats per vector. Must match your embedding model's output.

| Embedding model | Dimension |
|---|---|
| `all-MiniLM-L6-v2` | 384 |
| `all-mpnet-base-v2` | 768 |
| OpenAI `text-embedding-3-small` | 1536 |
| OpenAI `text-embedding-3-large` | 3072 |
| Cohere `embed-v4.0` | 1024 |

### Distance metric

Controls how similarity is measured between vectors.

| Metric | Description | Best for |
|---|---|---|
| `cosine` | Cosine similarity (default) | Normalized text embeddings |
| `euclidean` | L2 distance | When magnitude matters |
| `dot` | Dot product | Pre-normalized vectors, maximum inner product |

```python
db.create_collection("docs", dimension=384, metric="cosine")
db.create_collection("images", dimension=512, metric="euclidean")
db.create_collection("scores", dimension=768, metric="dot")
```

### Index type

Controls how vectors are searched.

| Index | Description | When to use |
|---|---|---|
| `flat` | Exact brute-force search (default) | Datasets under ~100k vectors. 100% recall. |
| `hnsw` | Approximate nearest neighbor (HNSW graph) | Large datasets. Faster but slightly lower recall. |

```python
db.create_collection("small", dimension=384, index="flat")
db.create_collection("large", dimension=384, index="hnsw")
```

## Managing collections

```python
db.list_collections()
# ["documents", "images", "scores"]

coll = db.get_collection("documents")

db.delete_collection("scores")
```

## Upserting data

Each vector entry has:

| Field | Type | Required | Description |
|---|---|---|---|
| `id` | `str` | Yes | Unique identifier |
| `vector` | `list[float]` | Yes | Embedding vector (must match collection dimension) |
| `metadata` | `dict` | No | Key-value pairs for filtering |
| `document` | `str` | No | Raw text for hybrid/keyword search |

```python
collection.upsert(
    ids=["doc-1", "doc-2"],
    vectors=[[0.1, 0.2, ...], [0.3, 0.4, ...]],
    metadata=[{"topic": "ml"}, {"topic": "nlp"}],
    documents=["intro to machine learning", "natural language processing"],
)
```

<Tip>
Upserting with an existing ID replaces that entry entirely — vector, metadata, and document.
</Tip>

## Counting and deleting

```python
collection.count()
# 2

collection.delete(ids=["doc-1"])
# [True]
```

Commit message:

Add persistent storage: mmap vectors + SQLite metadata + WAL crash recovery
Introduce durable persistence for vxdb so data survives process restarts
and crashes. Users opt in by passing a path to the Database constructor
(`Database(path="./data")`); omitting the path preserves the existing
in-memory behavior.

Storage engine (new file: persistent.rs):
- PersistentStorage combining mmap vector storage (vectors.vex) with
  SQLite WAL-journaled metadata (store.db) per collection
- Supports save_entry, save_batch, delete_entry, and load_all
- Batch writes wrapped in SQLite transactions

Collection persistence (collection.rs):
- Collection::create_persistent() and Collection::open() for on-disk
  lifecycle; config.json written per collection
- All mutation methods write-through to PersistentStorage when present
- Database::open() loads collections from disk, replays the WAL for
  crash recovery, then checkpoints
- create/delete_collection log to WAL and manage disk directories

WAL (wal.rs):
- Add optional document field to WalEntry::Upsert for BM25 coverage

Python bindings (vxdb-python):
- Database(path=None) -> in-memory; Database(path="./data") -> persistent

Docs & README:
- New persistence.mdx core-concepts page (layout, write path, recovery)
- All docs/examples updated to show persistent mode as default
- Zvec (Alibaba) added to comparison table with dedicated trade-off section
- Roadmap updated: persistence done; quantization, HNSW serialization planned

Housekeeping:
- .gitignore: add *.vex, *.wal, store.db patterns
- Remove tracked __pycache__ and .so build artifacts

docs/core-concepts/collections.mdx, after:

---
title: Collections
description: "Organize your vectors into collections with configurable dimensions, distance metrics, and index types."
---

## What is a collection?

A **collection** is a named container of vectors. Each collection has a fixed **dimension** (the number of floats per vector) and a configured **distance metric** and **index type**. A single `Database` can hold many collections.

```python
import vxdb

db = vxdb.Database(path="./my_data")  # persistent
collection = db.create_collection(
    name="documents",
    dimension=384,
    metric="cosine",
    index="flat",
)
```

<Tip>
When using a persistent database (`path=`), collections and all their data are automatically saved to disk. Reopen the same path to restore everything.
</Tip>

## Parameters

### Dimension

The number of floats per vector. Must match your embedding model's output.

| Embedding model | Dimension |
|---|---|
| `all-MiniLM-L6-v2` | 384 |
| `all-mpnet-base-v2` | 768 |
| OpenAI `text-embedding-3-small` | 1536 |
| OpenAI `text-embedding-3-large` | 3072 |
| Cohere `embed-v4.0` | 1024 |

### Distance metric

Controls how similarity is measured between vectors.

| Metric | Description | Best for |
|---|---|---|
| `cosine` | Cosine similarity (default) | Normalized text embeddings |
| `euclidean` | L2 distance | When magnitude matters |
| `dot` | Dot product | Pre-normalized vectors, maximum inner product |

```python
db.create_collection("docs", dimension=384, metric="cosine")
db.create_collection("images", dimension=512, metric="euclidean")
db.create_collection("scores", dimension=768, metric="dot")
```

### Index type

Controls how vectors are searched.

| Index | Description | When to use |
|---|---|---|
| `flat` | Exact brute-force search (default) | Datasets under ~100k vectors. 100% recall. |
| `hnsw` | Approximate nearest neighbor (HNSW graph) | Large datasets. Faster but slightly lower recall. |

```python
db.create_collection("small", dimension=384, index="flat")
db.create_collection("large", dimension=384, index="hnsw")
```

## Managing collections

```python
db.list_collections()
# ["documents", "images", "scores"]

coll = db.get_collection("documents")

db.delete_collection("scores")
```

## Upserting data

Each vector entry has:

| Field | Type | Required | Description |
|---|---|---|---|
| `id` | `str` | Yes | Unique identifier |
| `vector` | `list[float]` | Yes | Embedding vector (must match collection dimension) |
| `metadata` | `dict` | No | Key-value pairs for filtering |
| `document` | `str` | No | Raw text for hybrid/keyword search |

```python
collection.upsert(
    ids=["doc-1", "doc-2"],
    vectors=[[0.1, 0.2, ...], [0.3, 0.4, ...]],
    metadata=[{"topic": "ml"}, {"topic": "nlp"}],
    documents=["intro to machine learning", "natural language processing"],
)
```

<Tip>
Upserting with an existing ID replaces that entry entirely — vector, metadata, and document.
</Tip>

## Counting and deleting

```python
collection.count()
# 2

collection.delete(ids=["doc-1"])
# [True]
```
